 — Великая Устрица говорила! — голос Греффита был исполнен благоговения, а гребень его пылал взволнованным янтарным светом, пока он вёл Керис от группы хижин из озёрной ивы к берегу озера. Позади них, в зале, Керис слышала Вождя клана и его сыновей, спорящих с разъярённым Милффином.

 — Неозёрный житель, направляющийся к Великой Устрице, — протестовал он. — Это безобразие!

 — Она прибыла издалека, чтобы увидеть мудрейшую, — раздался голос Слиффа в ответ.

 — И Великая Устрица хочет говорить с нею, —  высказался Вождь клана Фелффт, чем вызвал ропот одобрения.

Снаружи в лунном свете, Керис и Греффит, clam-tender, поспешно двигались по озёрному берегу. Керис едва сдерживала волнение. Наконец, после всего, через что она прошла, она встретится с Великой Устрицей. 
Рядом квакала колония тростниковых жаб, их громкие урчащие трели были прерваны пронзительным криком blackheron-a, летающим низко над озером. Парочка оставила позади последние из оставшихся группы хижин; миновала рыбацкие плоты на пляже и просмолённые челноки и направилась дальше, пробираясь между рядами sallowdrops и плакучими ивами, которые выстроились вдоль берега. Над их головами луна пересекла линию горизонта и заняла своё место на небе, огромная и золотая, отражаясь в зеркальной поверхности озера. Они остановились на месте без деревьев, которые выстроились позади них, где на небольшом покатом пляже торчали пучки травы.

Керис заметила следы в грязи, ведущие в ласково плещущие воды озера.

 — Это то место? — спросила она, её сердце вдруг бешено заколотилось.

Grefphith’s crest glowed blue in assent. He padded on his great webbed feet over the soft lakeshore mud to a post from which hung a great leather gourd, similar to the one he’d filled with water to greet his brothers. Unhooking it, Grefphith reached into the forage sack that hung next to the anchor stone on his belt and drew out a handful of small, sponge-like mushrooms.

As Keris watched, intrigued, the clam-tender carefully poured the mushrooms down the long tubular spout of the gourd. Then he placed the gourd under one arm and pumped it like a pair of bellows. Almost at once, there was a loud hissing sound, and the gourd’s leathery folds stretched until it was twice its original size.

Grefphith motioned to Keris to join him at the water’s edge, where he strapped the gourd securely to her back.

‘We webfoots can breathe the waters of our lake, but you outlakers need a little help,’ he told her, handing Keris the spout and indicating that she should place it in her mouth.

She clamped the end of the spout between her teeth, noting the taste of woodmint that filled her mouth as she did so. Carefully, Grefphith placed a small carved ivory clip over Keris’s nose.

‘Breathe through your mouth,’ he told her. ‘The silt-fungus will have absorbed enough air for your dive to the lake bed and back, but your time with the clam will be short …’

‘But how will I be able to talk with this in my mouth?’ Keris asked in confusion, taking the spout out of her mouth for a moment.

The clam-tender smiled and placed his anchor stone firmly in the lakeshore mud. ‘You’ll see,’ he said. ‘Now, when you’re ready, place your hands on my shoulders and I’ll swim for the both of us.’

Grefphith turned to face the lake with his back to her, and Keris did as she was told. The webfoot’s scaly skin was cold to the touch and she felt the muscles in his shoulders give a sudden ripple. Then, before Keris knew it, they had dived into the mirror-like surface of the lake and were plunging down into the clear depths suffused in bright moonlight. She breathed in cool, minty air. Behind her, on her back, she could feel the gourd expand and contract with each breath. With every kick of his powerful legs and great webbed feet, Grefphith propelled them both, faster and faster, through the crystal-clear water.

To Keris’s left, a shoal of silver fish swam towards them, their fins flashing in the moonlight that sliced down through the water, before darting off to the left, a huge, brown fish with bulging eyes and a jutting lower jaw in hot pursuit. A nattertoad – all gaping mouth and kicking orange legs – swam past them at an angle, its target a great translucent stormhornet larvae, whose shapeless bodies writhed and wriggled in the shadows of the great plateleaf lilies up above.

Apart from the shallow streams that ran through the lower pastures of her home, Keris had seldom been in water before, and the sensations – coldness, wetness and the constant pressure coming in from all sides – unnerved her. Yet she felt safe with Grefphith. And as she relaxed and her grip on his shoulders loosened slightly, the webfoot began pointing things out to her – a frondy ball of pink weed that, as they came closer, revealed itself to be thousands of feeding watershrimps clustered together; a ten-legged creature with a body like a balloon, which sucked in and spat out water as it propelled itself across the lake; striped lakeworms and spotted waterscorpions. And far far below them, where the lakegrass swayed like barleyrice in a gale, she saw a long line of giant lake snails, their pearly shells gleaming as the moonbeams struck them, plodding sedately across the silty bottom of the lake.

All at once, Grefphith pointed downwards. His crest throbbed deepest indigo with lines of silver as he kicked out even more strongly. Keris tightened her grip on his shoulders as they swooped down towards the lake bed far beneath them. The next moment, she felt the lake water bubble and swirl about them as, instead of being propelled by Grefphith’s steady kicks, they were suddenly being shot forward by a far greater force.

With his crest bright orange, Grefphith clamped his arms to his side. Keris clung on tightly. Faster and faster the two of them went, hurtling through the water like … like …

Keris smiled to herself as the lake rushed past her in a blur of blue and silvery white.

Like flying!

Oh, Father, she wondered, was this what it was like on the bridge of a mighty sky pirate ship, speeding across the sky?

Down into the depths of the lake they raced, leaving the moonlit water behind. Ahead of them, yet getting closer with every passing second, the dark waters of the lake bed were illuminated by an eerie blue glow. And as they drew closer, Keris realized where the light was emanating from.

It was pouring out of a magnificent, ridged bicuspid shell.

The lower half was fused to the rocky lake bed, while the upper half gaped open. A hundred or more strides high it was, and twice that in breadth. To Keris it looked like a vast grinning mouth – a mouth that was sucking them inexorably closer and closer on a great swirling current of water. And as they hurtled towards it, she was suddenly overwhelmed with a cramping fear that they were about to be swallowed up. Closer to the great gaping maw they came, closer and closer and …

With a great creaking groan, the two huge halves of the vast clam slammed shut. The swirling current instantly ceased, the blue light was extinguished, and Keris and Grefphith found themselves floating gently down to the lake bed, their eyes filled with the orange afterglow of the clam’s dazzling light.

Grefphith motioned for Keris to let go of his shoulders and indicated a flat rock in front of the giant clam for her to perch on. Then, as she waited in the gloom, Grefphith swam off, feeding-fork at the ready, to deal with the line of giant lake snails they had spotted earlier. In the distance, the huge creatures seemed to sense his approach and began to scatter in clouds of muddy sediment. On her stone perch, Keris waited, the gourd on her back rising and falling with each breath.

What now? she wondered. How long would she have to wait? Grefphith had said her time with the clam would have to be short. Should she do something? Tap on its shell perhaps?

In front of her, the clam remained resolutely shut, the join between the two shells now a zigzag line without even the hint of a crack. High above, the surface of the upper shell was like a vast garden, home to countless flowers, ferns, and towering treelike plants that swayed in the ever-shifting currents of water, just as the massive trees of the Deepwoods forest did in the air far above. And as she sat there, Keris watched intrigued as dim shafts of moonlight from far above struck the striped fish and tusked eels which swam in and out of the fronds; at the rock lobsters scuttling along the ridges of the great blue shell – and on an ungainly creature with twelve spindly legs and a disc-shaped head which tottered imperturbably through the lush vegetation …

All at once there was a tremendous rumbling sound followed by an unearthly creaking. The fish all round darted for cover in the underwater vegetation. The rumbling became louder and stronger, vibrating through the rocks beneath her feet and stirring up the mud once more. The water itself seemed to tremble.

At last! thought Keris, gripping the sides of the flat rock with a mixture of excitement and fear.

As the two shells of the giant clam slowly parted, the dazzling blue light shone out once more, flooding the lake bed all round with its intense radiance and pouring into Keris’s wide, unblinking eyes. Slowly and sedately, the clam yawned open, to reveal a vast interior of mottled blue pleats and folds.

And there, nestling deep at the centre of the gaping clam, was a pearl. A huge, opalescent pearl. Flawless and spherical, it was the source of the light which was bathing Keris in its intense blue glow.

Keris was mesmerized and transfixed. Unable to stir herself and pull away, her senses were completely overwhelmed. Now there was nothing but the pulsating blue light, filling her eyes, her mouth and ears, seeping through her pores, banishing any thought of time or place.

It was as if she was dissolving. Her conscious thoughts faded; her sense of herself disappeared, like warm bubbles of breath rising up and being carried away on the lake currents.

She was no longer Keris the slaughterer girl, far from home and full of questions.

Instead she was now the great blueshell clam, sharing its memories of the very start of its long existence …

A tiny insignificant speck, she was, being blown through the great empty void on strong currents, for ever. Back and forth, journeying restlessly through the endless tracts of Open Sky. On and on, gathering speed and power …

An intense and pulsating brightness. Tiny yet inexpressibly powerful until …

There was a blinding flash and great black storm-clouds swirled up overhead. There was a crash of thunder. And then came the sensation of falling, falling down towards the thirsty earth.

Then blackness. Everything quiet, muffled. Trickling slowly through rock, deep below the surface of the earth. Moving through cracks, over crevices, into pools – gathering speed, gaining momentum. Flowing faster and faster with the underground springs, this way and that. Becoming part of a mighty current blasting its way through the earth; powerful, surging, then …

Everything suddenly stopped.

Stuck fast to this very rock. Rooted, immovable, down here on the lake bed. After so long, finally at rest.

At last, all that pulsating power turned itself into growth. The speck got bigger – a wonderful feeling …

My shell formed, the currents flowed back and forth over my blue surface, the nourishing silt swirled beneath. The rock anchored my great blue shell.

And time passed …

Now I am huge. Down here in the calm depths, I can sense the world above me. It seeps into the lake water, eddies up through the lake bed; it flavours the silt. I can taste it. I sift through it all as I lie, rooted to the rock; tasting, sensing, knowing …

The coming of creatures, the slow growth of the forest, the storms passing overhead – I can sense them all.

Far off, the acrid taint of Undertown; the deathly must of the Mire that tinges the lake water; the flashing spark of stormphrax and the glow of the Twilight Woods; they ripple imperceptibly through the currents. Always changing. And I – the great blueshell clam – detect them. I can taste the migration of tilder and hammelhorn, feel the tramp of goblin tribes, sense the movement of clouds over the glassy surface of the lake overhead.

I am the first, the most ancient. I am the beginning of life. A speck from Open Sky that fell from the Mother Storm and took root here on this rock far down in the depths of this peaceful lake.

Now you, Keris – another tiny speck of life – have come to the great blueshell clam to find answers. You, Keris, are a speck that clings to life but has no place to root itself. Lost, far from the silver pastures and smoky brazier fires, you are seeking your roots. I can sense it …

You are seeking your father.

Yes, little one, the great blueshell clam can sense him. Out there, far beyond the four great lakes, is the trace of your father; one who has been touched by the Mother Storm. A tiny speck of life himself, but a strong one …

And there is someone else. Yet another speck of life. Connected to both of you. Faint, yet acrid, and glowing like the spark that starts a great forest fire, this speck of life has changed the forests all round her with her fierce intensity. This speck of life is changing the world.

The great blueshell clam can sense it.

It can sense something else, too. The time has come, as the clam always knew it would; the time to reach out into this world.

You, my little one, must reach out with me …

Keris’s mind was filled with a cascade of dazzling images, one after the other, fleeting yet crystal clear.

‘Yes,’ she nodded, ‘I understand.’

All at once the clam slammed abruptly shut and, like the blast of a hurricane or the thrust of a mighty waterfall sweeping a dam aside and gushing forwards, a powerful surge of water struck Keris full on, tearing her away from the blue light.

Ever faster she sped, twisting and turning in the dark water as she hurtled through the moonbeam-shot depths up towards the surface of the lake, before shooting out of the water like a leaping gladesalmon.

Gasping and spluttering, Keris came crashing back down into the lake. Great waves rippled out across the placid surface. On her back, the gourd deflated with a wheezing sigh as Keris pulled the breathing spout from her mouth and gulped in a lungful of fresh night air. A moment later, beside her, Grefphith’s crest broke the surface of the water and his smiling face greeted her.

He reached out for Keris, who clutched gratefully to his arm, and together – following the long tether-rope – the two of them swam slowly back to shore where his anchor-rock nestled in the lakeshore mud. Crawling onto the grassy bank, Keris turned to Grefphith.

‘The clam spoke to me,’ she said softly. ‘The answer I seek lies far from here in a place called the Free Glades. I must …’ She frowned, for the webfoot was staring back at her, his mouth open and his crest pulsating with surprise. ‘What?’ she said. ‘Grefphith, what is it?’

‘It’s incredible,’ he said, looking her up and down. ‘In all my time as a clam-tender, I’ve never seen anything like it …’

Keris looked down – and then she noticed. Her entire body – skin, hair, clothes – was covered in a fine layer of sparkling silt. It was powdery and pale in the moonlight, with slightly lighter streaks that had collected in the crook of her arm and the cracks of her knuckles. She licked a finger and ran it across her arm, and turned back to Grefphith.

‘It won’t come off,’ she said.

Внимание! Этот перевод, возможно, ещё не готов.
Его статус: идёт перевод

Переведено на Нотабеноиде
http://notabenoid.com/book/31723/110081

Переводчики: jjjrrr

