Существо откинуло свою массивную голову и испустило громовой рев. Звук - смесь гортанного гнева и дикой боли - прогудил через Дремучие Леса. Земля задрожала, а верхушки деревьев зашелестели, в то время как те, для кого большой лес был домом, сжались и сьежились от страха.

Колонии длинноконечностных долгоруков, пирующие высоко в кронах сыроив, резко отбросили сочные фрукты и сбились в стайки, подвывая от страха. Кое-где последовали яркие вспышки чего-то синего - это прыгали с ветки на ветку спасающиеся лемкины, детеныши цеплялись за спины старших, сбиваясь в группки по три-четыре особи. На лесной подстилке огромное стадо тильдеров, чьи пятнистые морды испустили характерный кричащий сигнал тревоги, через лесные поляны обратились в паническое бегство, словно краевой лосось, несущийся общим скопом по течению. На их пути, освещенный солнцем воздух был заполонен тысячами прозрачных ветропрядов

Вбирая воздух огромными хрипящими вздохами, существо продолжало свое бешеное зигзагообразное движение через лес. Оно мчалось напрямик через деревья, кусты и растения, отбрасывая их без усилий со своего пути. И поскольку оно своим неистовым танцем невольно прокладывало огромную тропу, через бреши в деревьях в темный лес проникли целые столбы света, осветив массивную форму создания.

У него были огромные, мускулистые плечи, на которых расположилась явно деформированная голова с видимым отсутствием шеи. Гигантский, мощный живот с нарывами и прыщами находился на относительно коротких, но очень солидных ногах, которые по размеру и толщине походили на стволы медных сосен. Но наиболее поразительными, не считая конечно рта, окаймленного внутри желтыми клыками, и, крошечных блестящих, налитых кровью глазок, были руки твари.

Они были гигантской длины и, когда существо бежало, то задевало костяшками на их концах травяной покров. Именно этими руками тварь расчищала себе путь через лес большими косящими ударами, заставляющими падать сыроивы и вонючие деревья, которые ломали многочисленные кустарники на земле.

Вдруг существо остановилось. Когда оно это сделало, в налитых кровью глазах и на сырых мясистых ранах, что бежали окаймленными зелеными полосами по плечам, отразился солнечный свет. Солнечные лучи блестели на желтых клыках, когда разьяренное создание отбросило назад огромную уродливую голову и взвыло вновь смесью боли и гнева.

Мгновение спустя, в куче пыли и упавших веток оно возобновило свое движение, несясь вслепую через лес. Внезапно тварь споткнулась о переплетение корней и рухнула рядом с высоким тонким лафом. Ревя от ярости, существо обхватило руками ствол несчастного дерева и полностью его выкорчевало, затем подбросило над своими большущими плечами. Останки лафа с грохотом в ливне веток и листьев рухнули на землю. 

А на самых верхних ветвях могучей железной сосны, намного выше полога леса, из тени, отбрасываемой большими конусовидными шишками, что висели группами под самой кроной дерева, появился зубоскал и его наездник. Зубоскал аккуратно проскакал вдоль ветви, большие чувствительные пальцы ног говорили ему инстинктивно, что она выдержит его вес. Он остановился у самой оконечности ветви и, умело балансируя, принялся ждать дальнейших указаний.

The prowlgrin's rider was dressed in the distinctive uniform of the Freeglade Lancers; a crested copper helmet with neck and cheek-guards, a white tunic emblazoned with a red banderbear head, finely tooled wood-armour of rich sumpwood and forest elm which protected arms and legs and, most distinctive of all, a thick lance of seasoned ironwood clasped in a gauntleted hand. Only the collar gave away the fact that, despite appearances, this rider was not quite a Freeglade Lancer. It was solid green, and marked its wearer out as a cadet who had not yet been blooded in battle.

The rider reached down and patted his prowlgrin mount.

'Steady, Lyrinx, lass,' he whispered. 'I hear it, too. Seems to be coming this way.'

Far below, the great bellowing roar of the creature sounded again.

'Gather, brothers,' a soft, whispery voice sounded in the cadet's head. 'The glades are threatened...'

The cadet gave a twitch of the reins he held in one hand. In response, the prowlgrin launched herself from the ironwood branch and out over the green forest canopy below. They fell for what seemed like minutes, but was in fact, as the cadet well knew, mere seconds, as the treetops raced up to meet them. Suddenly - like breaking the surface of a green forest pool - they plunged through the leafy canopy and into the depths of the forest below. The prowlgrin's great toes fastened onto a branch as her huge rear-legs braced to cushion the landing.

From branches all round came the gentle creak and leaf-rustle of other landing prowlgrins. Two, three there were. Eight, nine, ten - prowlgrins and riders, clustered in the branches of the surrounding trees.

'All here, sergeant,' the whispery voice sounded in every head. The speaker - a tiny waif called Cedifice - gazed at the others with his enormous pale grey eyes, his veined wafer-thin ears quivering. 'Whatever it is, i can tell from the sound of its footfalls, it is enormous,' the waif whispered. 'And it appears to be in pain.'

As if in answer, another howl sounded in the distance, and the waif's prowlgrin - a sleek white beast with a long, knotted beard - shifted uneasily on his branch.

'I can discern no coherent thoughts, Sergeant.' Cedifice's huge ears trembled and the waif winced uncomfortably. 'Only rage... And pain. But one thing i can tell you,' the waif concluded, 'is that the creature is heading for the southern fringes of the Free Glades.'

Sergeant Hulm Logglimb tugged at the stump of the ear he'd lost at the Battle of Lufwood Mount many years earlier, and looked around at the expectant faces of his lancers. He was a short, stocky gnokgoblin, battle-scared and wily, who never asked his lancers to do anything that he wouldn't do himself. For that, they loved and respected him.

'Well, brothers,' he began, tapping his lance on the tree branch as he weighed up his words. 'Seems like there won't be time to call out the rest of the troop, so it's going to be all down to us in the Fifth Splinter to head this creature off before it reaches the Glades. What do you say?

'I say, yes, sergeant!' the cadet responded enthusiastically. 'Lyrinx and I can scout ahead of the splinter and...'

'It's not for you to say anything. You're still just a cadet,' said the first of three short, large-nosed gyle-goblins, each of them mounted on a frisky white and grey prowlgrin.

The gyle-goblins admitted to no names individually and were known by the rest of the lancers simply as 'the Gyles'. Draped over their saddles, they each had an elaborate cloak of expertly woven leaves and berry branches which, when worn, rendered them virtually invisible in the forest canopy. Their job was to scout for the splinter.

'The Gyles are right, Rufus, old son,' said Lancer Felludine. He turned to Sergeant Logglimb. 'As for me, sir, I say let's do it.'

Gaddius Felludine was a large, heavy-browed fourthling. He was ungainly but powerful, and when roused to anger a fearsome fighter. A lancer of few words, Felludine never spoke of his past, yet it was common knowledge that he had left a troubled and difficult life behind him. After many long years of searching he had found acceptance in the Free Glades. He was a frequent visitor to Waif Glen, where the wounds of his past were gradually being healed. Grateful to the Free Glades, he had no hesitation in laying down his life for the place he loved, and his fellow lancers knew it.

'Thank you, Gaddius,' said the sergeant. He looked up at the three lancers perched on the branches above him. 'And how about you?'

All three were, like himself, gnokgoblins. There was Lance-Corporal Degg Fledder, heavy-lidded and cautious, always looking before leaping, but a skilful lancer. And then there were the twins, Hudflux and Holt. The pair of them were cheerful and happy-go-lucky, always ready with a joke or an encouraging word - and both were deadly accurate with a crossbow.

'We're with you, sergeant,' all three replied, suddenly serious as yet another chilling howl echoed up from the forest below them.

'It's getting closer, whatever it is,' said the final lancer in the splinter, a young mobgnome by the name of Tam Whytewinter.

Like his comrades, he wore a collar of white and green chequerboards that denoted that he'd been blooded in battle, fighting alongside the others in his splinter. In Whytewinter's case, his boards had been earned just a few months ago in a nasty skirmish to the south of the Goblin Nations with a roving band of skulltrogs. He'd been wounded in the leg - an injury that still bothered him, though he was always careful not to show it.

'Rufus can ride with me, sergeant,' Tam said. He smiled at the cadet. 'I'll keep him out of trouble! He's far too young to earn his boards just yet.'

The others laughed. Everyone knew that Tam and cadet Rufus Filantine were practically the same age - and were also the best of friends. In fact, it was only a nasty case of bark-croup that had kept Rufus back at the roost when the company had been called out to deal with the skulltrogs. Otherwise, he would not still be wearing the plain green collar.

'Patience, Rufus,' the waif's whispery voice sounded in the cadet's head. 'Your time will come soon enough.'

Rufus Filantine, his face flushed and unhappy looking, gazed across into the kindly eyes of Cedifice the waif. Small and physically weak the waif signaller might be, Rufus acknowledged, but Cedifice was a vital member of the splinter. He sent messages, listened out for sounds of danger and, most importantly of all perhaps, spread words of comfort and understanding amongst the group with his telepathy.

'Well, what are we waiting for?' said Sergeant Logglimb, raising his lance and giving the time-honoured battle-cry. 'FREEGLADER!'

'FREEGLADER!' the ten lancers of his splinter replied, their prowlgrins taking off at a gallop and leaping through the treetops after their leader in the direction of the terrible sound.

The Gyles sped on ahead, their white and grey prowlgrins faster and even more nimble than the others.

'Tell them to distract the creature,' Sergeant Logglimb called to the waif. 'We'll ride round and come in from the south.'

'Sir,' the waif whispered back.

'Load those crossbows,' the sergeant called over to Lance-Corporal Fledder and the gnokgoblin twins, who nodded grimly.

‘And Gaddius, keep that lance handy,’ he said.
‘You two . . .' He glanced over his shoulder to make sure Tam and Rufus were following on their prowlgrins. ‘Make sure you cover our backs.’

With that, the sergeant urged his own great orange prowlgrin on faster through the trees, the gnokgoblins and large fourthling following close behind. Up ahead, the sound of trees crashing to the
forest floor grew suddenly louder.

‘You heard what he said,’ said Tam, pulling up his prowlgrin, Nixus, and watching the five lanсers advance through the trees ahead. 
‘I know, I know,’ said Rufus bitterly, following his friend's example.

Lyrinx halted next to Nixus on the broad branch of a pewterbark tree. Together, the two lancers surveyed the forest ﬂoor below.

‘Here it comes.’ Cediﬁce's voice sounded in their
heads. ‘It's ignoring the Gyle’ slings.’
Sure enough. up ahead. Rufus could just make out the buzzing sound of the small pebbles being catapulted at the creature by the gyle-goblins in
their efforts to distract it.

‘The sergeant says to strike your fire-crystals . . .' The
waif communicated their leader's instructions.
ln the treetops in the distance, Rufus saw ﬁve pinpoints of light suddenly ﬂare up as the lanoers lit brushwood torches.

Of course, ﬁre! he realized. The deepest fear of
any primitive creature. His hand reached for the two crystals in the small pouch at his belt and he tumed to pull a brushwood bundle from his saddle pack.

‘Tam, Rufus,‘ came the voice. ‘Don't light your
torches yet . . .' The wall passed on Sergeant
Logglimb's command. ’We’re going to try and turn it
before it reaches you . . .'

Tam and Rufus exchanged glances. As the junior
members of the splinter, they knew they role was to
stay in reserve — but it was frustrating nonetheless.
Rufus leaned forward in the saddle and scanned
the horizon. He could see the torches ﬂaring in the
treetops - yet the sound of crashing and splinter-lng
trees seemed to be getting closer still.

’Hudflux! Holt! To the left! Fledder. higher! Double back behind!..." The waif's voice, still a whisper, was tense and urgent. ‘That's it... That's it... Sergeant, look out!'


Up ahead, there was a deafening howl and Rufus saw a great copperwood tree rise up, then topple back with a crash. Beside him, Tam gasped. But looking up, Rufus saw that his friend's gaze was not on the forest in front of him. No, rather, he was staring down at the forest floor below them. He looked down too, and gasped with horror.


Back from a day's foraging, a party of half a dozen woodtrolls - an old male, three females and a couple of young'uns - were making their way towards the Free Glades. They were carrying baskets and barrels of oak-mushrooms, wood-toadstools, pine-nuts and bark-gourds carefully on their heads and, although from the looks on their face it was clear that they could hear the commotion ahead of them, they didn't seem to realize the danger they were heading towards.

Rufus twitched the reins and Lyrinx bounded down through the branches to the forest floor.

‘Rufus. wait . . .' Tam called after him. but the
cadet ignored him.

The woodtrolls were in danger and he had to
warn them.

Lyrinx landed on the ground ten strides in front of the small party, and Rufus was about to call out to them when all at once the woodtrolls came to a sudden halt. Their eyes as large as lufwood saucers, the woodtrolls tossed their barrels and baskets of carefully gathered produce to the forest ﬂoor, spun on their heels and fled for their lives.

‘Rufus! Watch out!’ Tam's voice called out from
above.

Too late, the cadet swivelled round in his saddle
and caught sight of what the woodtrolls had
glimpsed over his shoulder. He swallowed hard.

Coming towards him through the forest. its red eyes boring into his own, drool hanging in heavy gobbets from a snaggle-tusked mouth, was the most enormous creature Rufus had ever seen. With a roar of rage, it shot out a great curved claw. forcing Lyrinx to leap out of the way with a yelp of terror.

The movement caught Rufus off-balance and sent him crashing to the earth. He looked up to see the terrifying creature towering over him. It howled with rage. He screwed his eyes shut and clawed at the Deepwoods dirt, his body tensing for the blow he was sure was about to fall.

Above him, the creature's furious howling seemed suddenly to catch in its throat and tum to a spluttering gurgle. Hardly daring to look, Rufus
raised his face from the rich, peaty loam of the soil and looked up. The mighty creature stood before him, motionless. Its great arms were spread wide, the chipped claws glistening strangely in the sunlight. There was a look of dazed shock and confusion plastered across its misshapen features.

Then Rufus saw it. Protruding from the creature's barrel-chest, just above its great bloated belly, was the tip of an ironwood lance glistening with blood.

With a soft sigh, the creature pitched forwards and crashed to the forest floor widt a great thud. Frozen with shock, Rufus found himself inches
from the creature's contorted face, staring at his own horriﬁed reﬂection in a single glazed red eye.
Sergeant Logglimb appeared a moment later, his prowlgrln Pheddix panting with exertion. He dismounted and climbed onto the massive creature’s back. Then, with a grunt of effort, he slowly pulled his Ironwood lance from the body and stood looking at its dripping point ruefully.

Rufus climbed shakily to his feet., his heart still hammering away beneath his ribcage.

'I didn't want to do that,' said Sergeant Logglimb quietly. He fixed Rufus with his unblinking gaze. 'But you gave me not choise, cadet.'

Rufus stared back at the sergeant, his face flushing with colour.

'I...I wanted to warn the woodtrolls...' he began, but the expression on the sergeanfs face stopped him.

‘Lancer Whytewinter did that from the treetops,’ he said. ‘You, on the other hand, put yourself in harm's way - and forced me to kill this unfortunate, demented creature.’ The sergeant shook his head
slowly and climbed down, lance in hand. ‘This is no
way to earn your boards, Rufus.’

The cadet hung his head in shame and bit his lip. ‘I'm sorry, sergeant . . .' he mumbled.

He felt Logglimb's hand on his shoulder.
‘That’ s all right, cadet,’ he said, his voice suddenly gentle and compassionate. 'We shall not speak of this again.’

Rufus nodded and, looking up, saw that the rest
of the splinter were arriving. They gathered round
the body of the strange creature, their eyes wide.
Beside him, Tam handed his friend back the reins of
his prowlgrin.

‘Are you all right?‘ he asked.
Rufus nodded, and patted Lyrinx’s soft orange fur. ‘Sorry, lass.’ he whispered in her ear.
All eyes were on the dead creature. Cedifice was walking round it, his huge ears quivering.

‘Sergeant.’ he said at last. ‘Look at these marks.’ Sergeant Logglimb turned to the waif, who was pointing to deep wounds on the creature's shoulders.

‘These aren't the wounds of an accident . . .' The waif shook his head and inspected the green-fringed stripes, before turning back. ‘No, these are rope burns, sergeant.’

‘Rope burns?’

‘Made by some sort of tight-fitting harness.‘ Cedifice frowned thoughtfully. "This creature, whatever it was, has been ill-treated. These wounds
alone must have been torment, not to mention these. . .’ His ears trembled as he pointed to small criss-crossing scars on the creature's arms and legs.
‘Whip marks. No wonder the poor thing was driven half out of its mind.’

‘I've never seen a creature like it.’ said Corporal
Fledder, shaking his head.
‘Nor have we.’ agreed the gyle-goblins, their leafy cloaks rustling.

Lancer Gaddius Felludine stroked his beard thoughtfully. ‘What do you suppose it is?‘ he asked.
‘I know,’ said Rufus, stepping forward. ‘At least I know what my father and the other librarian academics call creatures like this . . .'

‘You do?’ said Tam, turning ho his friend.
‘Yes,’ said Rufus quietly. ‘They call them the
nameless ones.’

Внимание! Этот перевод, возможно, ещё не готов.
Его статус: идёт перевод

Переведено на Нотабеноиде
http://notabenoid.com/book/31723/110084

Переводчики: jjjrrr

